The Translation
The Noble Mahavaipulya sutra “A Multitude of Budas” 
Chapter 45: The Stem Array
1. Chapter 1
THE SETTING
[V37] [B24] [F.274.b]37
1. 1 The Bhagavat was in Shravasti, in a greatly adorned kutagara in Jetavana,
Anathapindada’s park, together with the Bodhisattvas [F.275.a] Samanta-
bhadra, Manjushri, and others, including the Bodhisattva mahasattvas
Jnanottara jnanin, Sattvottara jnanin, Asangottara jnanin, Kusumottara-
jnanin, Suryottara jnanin, Candrottara jnanin, Vimalottara jnanin, Vajrottara-
jnanin, Virajottara jnanin, and the Bodhisattva Vairocanottara jnanin; the
Bodhisattvas Jyotirdhvaja, Merudhvaja, Ratnadhvaja, Asanga dhvaja,
Kusumadhvaja, Vimala dhvaja, Surya dhvaja, Rucira dhvaja, Virajadhvaja, and
the Bodhisattva Vairocana dhvaja; the Bodhisattvas Ratnatejas, Mahatejas,
jnana vajra tejas, Vimala tejas, Dharma surya tejas, Punya parvata tejas,
Jnanavabhasa tejas, Samanta shri tejas, Samanta prabha shri tejas, and the
Bodhisattva Dasha dikprabha parisphuta; the Bodhisattvas Dharanigarbha,
Gagana garbha, Padma garbha, Ratnagarbha, Surya garbha, Guna vishuddhi-
garbha, Dharma samudra garbha, Vairocana garbha, Nabhigarbha, and the
Bodhisattva Padma shri garbha; the Bodhisattvas Sunetra, Vishuddhanetra,
Vimala netra, Asanga netra, Samanta darshana netra, Suvilokita netra,
Avalokitanetra, Utpalanetra, [F.275.b] Vajranetra, Ratnanetra, and the
Bodhisattva Gagana netra; the Bodhisattvas Deva mukuta, Dharma dhatu-
pratibhasa mani mukuta, Bodhi manda mukuta, Digvairocana mukuta, Sarva-
Buda sambhuta garbha mani mukuta, Sarva loka dhatudgata mukuta,
Samanta Vairocana mukuta, Anabhibhuta mukuta, Sarva Tathagata simhasana-
sampratishthita mani mukuta, and the Bodhisattva Samanta Dharma dhatu-
gagana pratibhasa mukuta; the Bodhisattvas Brahmendracuda,
Nagendracuda, Sarva Buda nirmana pratibhasa cuda, Bodhimandacuda,
Sarva pranidhana Sagara nirghosha mani raja cuda, Sarva Tathagata prabha-
mandala pramuncana mani ratna nigarjita cuda, Sarvakasha talasambheda-38 39
40
41
42
43
44 45
46

vijnapti mani ratna vibhushita cuda, Sarva Tathagata vikurvita pratibhasa dhvaja-
mani raja jala samchadita cuda, Sarva Tathagata Dharma cakra nirghosha cuda, and
the Bodhisattva Sarva tryadhva nama cakra nirghosha cuda; the Bodhisattvas
Mahaprabha, Vimala prabha, Vimala tejah prabha, Ratnaprabha,
Virajaprabha, Jyotishprabha, Dharmaprabha, Shanti prabha, Surya prabha,
Vikurvita prabha, and the Bodhisattva Devaprabha; the Bodhisattvas
Punya ketu, Jnanaketu, [F.276.a] Dharmaketu, Abhijnaketu, Prabhaketu,
Kusumaketu, Maniketu, Bodhiketu, Brahmaketu, and the Bodhisattva
Samantavabhasa ketu; the Bodhisattvas Brahmaghosha, Sagara ghosha,
Dharani nirnada ghosha, Lokendra ghosha, Shailendra raja samghattana ghosha,
Sarva Dharma dhatu spharana ghosha, Sarva Dharma dhatu Sagara nigarjita-
ghosha, Sarva mara mandala pramardana ghosha, Maha karunanaya megha-
nigarjita ghosha, and the Bodhisattva Sarva jagad duhkha prashantyashvasana-
ghosha; the Bodhisattvas Dharmodgata, Visheshodgata, Jnanodgata, Punya-
sumerudgata, Guna prabhavodgata, Yashodgata, Samantavabhasodgata,
Maha maitryudgata, jnana sambharodgata, and Tathagata kula gotrodgata;
the Bodhisattvas Prabhashri, Pravarashri, Samudgatashri, Vairocana shri,
Dharmashri, Candra shri, Gagana shri, Ratnashri, Ketushri, and the Bodhisattva
jnana shri; the Bodhisattvas Shailendra raja, Dharmendraraja, Jagadindraraja,
Brahmendraraja, Ganendraraja, Devendraraja, Shantendraraja, Acalendraraja,
Rishabhendraraja, [F.276.b] and the Bodhisattva Pravarendra raja; the
Bodhisattvas Prashanta svara, Asanga svara, Dharani nirghosha svara, Sagara-
nigarjita svara, Megha nirghosha svara, Dharmavabhasa svara, Gagana-
nirghosha svara, Sarva sattva kushala mula nigarjita svara, Purva pranidhana-
samcodana svara, and the Bodhisattva Mara mandala nirghosha svara; and the
Bodhisattvas Ratnabuddhi, Jnanabuddhi, Gagana buddhi, Vimala buddhi,
Asanga buddhi, Vishuddhabuddhi, Tryadhvavabhasa buddhi, Vishalabuddhi,
Samantavaloka buddhi, and the Bodhisattva Dharma dhatu nayavabhasa-
buddhi, and so on. There were five thousand Bodhisattvas in all who had all
arisen from completely good Bodhisattva conduct and prayers, who had
unimpeded fields of activity because they pervaded all Buda realms, who
had the blessing of infinite bodies because they came into the presence of all
Tathagatas, who had the pure orbs of unobscured eyes because they saw the
manifestations of all the Budas, who had gone to receive measureless
proclamations because they unceasingly came into the presence of all
Tathagatas when they attained buddhahood, who possessed infinite
radiance through having attained the radiance of wisdom in all the ways of
the ocean of the Dharma of the Budas, who taught good qualities
unceasingly throughout infinite kalpas because of their pure analytic
knowledge, who had unrestricted conduct of wisdom as far as the ends of
space because they manifested physical bodies in accordance with the47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57 58
59
60 61
62
63 64
65

aspirations of beings, [F.277.a] whose sight was free from defect because
they knew that the realm of beings has no souls and no beings, and who had
wisdom as vast as space because they pervaded the realm of phenomena
with a network of light rays.66
1. 2 There were five hundred Shravakas endowed with miraculous powers, all
of whom had realized the nature of the way of the truths; directly perceived
the true finality; comprehended the nature of phenomena; transcended the
ocean of existence; had the range of activity of the Tathagatas that is as
extensive as space; had ended fetters, predispositions, and bondage;
remained in an unobstructed state; dwelled in a peace that was like space;
had eliminated doubts, uncertainty, and equivocation concerning the
Budas; and followed the path of aspiration for the ocean of the wisdom of
the Budas. There were lords of the world who had served previous jinas,
who were dedicated to bringing benefit and happiness to all beings, who
became good guides without being asked, who were dedicated to protecting
other beings, who had attained the gateway to wisdom that transcends the
world, who had the motivation of never abandoning all beings, who had
originated from the field of activity of the teaching of all Budas, who
were dedicated to protecting the teachings of the Tathagatas, who were born
through prayers to be within the family of the Budas, who had attained
being within the family lineage of the Tathagatas, and who aspired to
omniscience.67
68
69
1. 3 Then those Bodhisattvas and their followers, and the Shravakas who had
miraculous powers [F.277.b] and the lords of the world and their followers
thought, “Without the Tathagata’s blessing, without the Tathagata’s
manifestations, without the Tathagata’s power, without the Tathagata’s past
prayers, without a past excellent practice of the roots of merit, without the
guidance of a kalyanamitra, without the pure eyes of faith, without the
attainment of the radiance of a vast aspiration, without the pure superior
motivation of a Bodhisattva, and without the determined aspiration for
omniscience, it is not possible for worldly beings and devas to comprehend,
or understand, or believe in, or know, or conceive of, or grasp, or analyze, or
meditate on, or classify, or reveal, or describe, or establish within other
beings the Tathagata’s domain, the scope of the Tathagata’s wisdom, the
Tathagata’s blessing, the Tathagata’s strengths, the Tathagata’s
fearlessness, the Tathagata’s samadhi, the Tathagata’s conduct, the
Tathagata’s state, the Tathagata’s supremacy, the Tathagata’s body, or
the Tathagata’s wisdom.70 71
1. 4 “May the Bhagavat teach us -we who have the aspirations of
Bodhisattvas -as well as all beings, who -because of their various
aspirations, different kinds of motivations, and different kinds of72
73

knowledge -use different kinds of words and terms, are on different levels
of power, and have different purity of faculties, different kinds of motivation
and conduct, different ranges of thought, different kinds of reliance on the
qualities of the Tathagatas, [F.278.a] and different kinds of interest in the
teaching of the Dharma.
1. 5 “May he teach us how in the past he set out to attain omniscience. May he
teach us how in the past he accomplished the aspiration of a Bodhisattva.
May he teach us how in the past he had a pure field of the perfections of a
Bodhisattva. May he teach us how in the past he had the miraculous
manifestations of having reached the level of a Bodhisattva. May he teach us
how in the past he had completely accomplished the field of conduct of a
Bodhisattva. May he teach us how in the past he had displayed
accomplishing the way of a Bodhisattva. May he teach us how in the past he
had a pure display of the Bodhisattva’s path. May he teach us how in the
past he displayed the accomplishment of an ocean of a Bodhisattva’s ways of
going forth. May he teach us how in the past he perfectly displayed an
ocean of the miraculous manifestations that are a Bodhisattva’s
attainments. May he teach us how in the past he had an ocean of a
Bodhisattva’s practices. May he teach us how he has an ocean of miraculous
manifestations through attaining enlightenment. May he also teach us how
he has manifested the most powerful miraculous manifestation of turning a
Tathagata’s wheel of the Dharma. May he also teach us how he has an ocean
of the miraculous manifestations of purifying a Tathagata’s Buda realm.
May he also teach us how he has the gateway of methods for guiding the
realm of beings. May he also teach us how he has sovereignty over the city
of the Dharma of an omniscient Tathagata. May he also teach us how he has a
Tathagata’s illumination of the path for all beings. [F.278.b] May he also teach
us how he has a Tathagata’s miraculous manifestation of entering into the
existences of beings. May he also teach us how he receives the offerings of
beings for a Tathagata. May he also teach us how he has a Tathagata’s miracle
of teaching merit and offerings to all beings. May he also teach us how the
Tathagata has created the perceived image of a Buda within the mental
processes of all beings. May he also teach us how the Tathagata has created
magical manifestations for all beings. May he also teach us how the
Tathagata has created the magical appearances of teachings and instructions
for all beings. May he also teach us the Tathagata’s manifestations of the
inconceivable range of the samadhis of buddhahood for all beings.”74
75
76
77
1. 6 Then the Bhagavat, knowing the thoughts in the minds of those
Bodhisattvas, rested in the samadhi called the gaping lion, which is as
extensive as space and therefore is beyond example and has adornments78

that appear to all beings, has the nature of being the gateway to great
compassion, possesses the gateway to great compassion, precedes great
compassion, and has the quality of great compassion.79
1. 7 As soon as the Bhagavat rested in that meditation, there appeared a
kutagara that was greatly adorned and so vast that it had no end or center,
with invincible vajra banners arranged on the ground, arrayed in networks
of all kings of precious jewels, filled with petals of flowers made of many
jewels, [F.279.a] beautified by pillars of beryl, with kings of jewels as an
arranged display of ornaments that illuminated the world, having a
multitude of excellent jewels, having heaps of precious jewels from the
Jambu River, with porches, toranas, pinnacles, and windows made of all
jewels, adorned by countless pure balconies, with an array of precious jewels
that resembled all the lords of worlds, with arrangements of the precious
jewels from the world’s oceans, covered with nets of all precious jewels,
with upraised parasols and banners, and beautified by gateways and toranas
emitting light rays that completely filled the realm of phenomena; the
external ground was beautified by indescribable daises for the surrounding
assembly, and in all directions there were stairways of heaps of jewels and
beautifully arranged adornments.80
81 82
1. 8 Through the power of the Buda, there were present Buda realms, to
the number of the atoms in countless Buda realms, that were immense and
vast in length and breadth, possessed various adornments made of all
jewels, had grounds made of an indescribable variety of precious jewels,
were encircled by walls of countless precious jewels, and were adorned by
lines of palm trees made of various jewels.
1. 9 Those Buda realms were adorned by immeasurable rivers of scented
water that were filled with an unceasing volume of scented water that was
mixed with many flowers made of a variety of jewels, flowing and turning to
the right, and resounding with descriptions of all the qualities of
buddhahood. [F.279.b]
1. 10 There were rows of precious white lotus flowers, precious trees beautifully
adorned by the blossoms of superior lotuses made from all jewels, rows of
countless kutagaras made of various jewels covered in shining networks of
every kind of precious jewel, countless aerial palaces made of precious
jewels adorned with all precious jewels, the aroma of countless incenses
spread everywhere, and the adornment of clouds of incense, countless
banners of jewels, banners of cloth, banners that were flags, banners with
streamers of jewels, banners with flowers, banners with adornments,
banners with garlands, banners with bells of various jewels, banners that
were parasols of kings of jewels, banners of precious jewels with
pervading radiance, banners of kings of precious jewels that resounded with83

the wheel of the names of all the Tathagatas, banners of delightful lions made
of the kings of precious jewels, banners of the kings of precious jewels that
proclaimed the past practices of all the Tathagatas, and banners of the kings
of precious jewels that illuminated the entire realm of phenomena, and all
directions were adorned with every kind of adorning banner.
1. 11 Clouds of countless aerial palaces of devas adorned the entire expanse of
the sky above Jetavana. Jetavana was adorned and covered by a cloud of
countless trees of various kinds of incense. [F.280.a] It was adorned and
encircled by Sumeru Mountains that possessed indescribable adornments. It
was adorned by the beautiful voices and sounds of the praises of all
Tathagatas that came from indescribable clouds of musical instruments being
played and beaten. It was adorned by a covering of clouds of indescribable
precious lotuses. There were indescribable precious lion thrones on which
were precious cushions made of divine materials, on which the Bodhisattvas
were seated, and which were adorned by clouds that emitted beautiful
voices that praised the Tathagatas. It was adorned by clouds of grains that
were precious jewels that formed indescribable images of lords of the
worlds. It was adorned by indescribable clouds of networks of white pearls.
It was adorned by a covering of indescribable clouds of kutagaras made of
red pearls. It was adorned by an indescribable rainfall from clouds of pearls
that were as hard as vajras.
1. 12 Why was this? It was because of the inconceivable roots of merit of a
Tathagata. It was because of the inconceivable good qualities of a Tathagata.
It was because of the inconceivable sovereign power and blessing of a
Tathagata. It was because of a Tathagata’s inconceivable miraculous
manifestations whereby his one body could pervade all world realms. It was
because of the inconceivable display of the spiritual power through which
all the Tathagatas could enter one body that appears throughout the entire
array of Buda realms. It was because of the inconceivable manifestations
of the Tathagatas through which they can show the perceivable image of the
entire realm of phenomena within a single atom. [F.280.b] It was because of
the inconceivable manifestations of the Tathagatas through which they can
show the entire succession of Tathagatas of the past within a single pore. It
was because of the Tathagatas’ inconceivable ability to illuminate infinite
world realms with a single ray of light. It was because of the Tathagatas’
inconceivable ability to pervade all Buda realms, which are as numerous
as the atoms that comprise all world realms, with a cloud of emanations from
a single body hair. It was because of the Tathagatas’ inconceivable ability to
reveal the kalpas of the creation and destruction of world realms from a
single body hair.

1. 13 Just as Jetavana was in this way a Buda realm and was completely
purified by being a pure realm, in that same way the world realms in the ten
directions to the limits of the realm of phenomena, to the limits of space,
were also completely purified, adorned, beautified, and with emanated
bodies of Tathagatas, and had become similar to Jetavana. They were filled
with Bodhisattvas; had ocean-like assemblies of followers of Tathagatas; had
rainfalls from clouds made of every kind of adornment; were completely
illuminated by the lights of all jewels; were adorned by rainfall from clouds
made of the entire variety of jewels; were adorned by a covering of clouds
made of the adorning features of all realms; were adorned by rainfalls of
every kind of divine material; were adorned by a profusion of clouds of
every kind of flower; were adorned by a beautiful rainfall of clothes of
every color falling from a treasure of clouds of trees of every kind of
clothing; [F.281.a] were adorned by a continuous rainfall from clouds made
of every kind of garland, tassel, and string of beads; were adorned by a rain
from masses of clouds as extensive as the universe that were made of
various kinds of incense and perfume that pervaded all the directions; were
adorned by a continuous rain of a fine powder of networks of jewels from
clouds of networks of flowers made from every kind of jewel; were adorned
by clouds of banners and flags made of every kind of jewel and held in the
hands of divine maidens who moved to and fro throughout the extent of
space; were adorned with a variety of lotuses made from all jewels and with
circles of precious petals, tall stems, and pericarps that resounded with the
beautiful sounds of music; and were adorned with nets of disks of every
kind of jewel, nets of lions made of jewels, and various kinds of garlands and
strings of beads.84
85
86
87
88
89
1. 14 In that way, as soon as the Bhagavat rested in the samadhi called the
gaping lion, at that time, in the eastern direction, beyond an ocean of world
realms as numerous as the atoms in countless Buda realms, there was the
world realm Kanaka megha pradipa dhvaja, the Tathagata Vairocana shri-
tejoraja’s Buda realm, where the Bodhisattva Vairocana pranidhana nabhi-
rashmi prabha, together with Bodhisattvas to the number of atoms in countless
Buda realms, with the permission of the Bhagavat, rose up from that ocean
of the assembly of followers, came to the Saha world realm, and adorned the
sky with clouds of various kinds of adornments: clouds of divine flowers
from which a rain of flowers fell, [F.281.b] clouds of divine perfume from
which a rain of perfume was released, clouds of divine jewel lotuses from
which a rain of lotuses was scattered, clouds of divine garlands from which a
rain of garlands was produced, clouds of divine jewels from which a rain of
jewels fell, clouds of divine jewelry from which a rain of jewelry fell, clouds
of divine precious parasols from which a rain of parasols was produced,

clouds of divine flowers from which a rain of flowers fell, clouds of various
kinds of fine divine clothing in different colors from which a rain of clothing
fell, clouds of divine precious banners and flags that stood in the sky, and
an array of clouds of every kind of jewel that filled the sky. Together with his
entourage, he approached the Bhagavat, bowed to the Bhagavat, and in the
eastern direction emanated perfectly adorned kutagaras that were covered
with a net of precious jewels, each containing a lion throne and a lotus made
of precious jewels that shined light in all directions, and he and his
entourage seated themselves cross-legged upon the lotuses, their
Bodhisattva bodies adorned with a network of the kings of precious wish-
fulfilling jewels.90
1. 15 In the southern direction, beyond an ocean of world realms as numerous
as the atoms in countless Buda realms, there was the world realm Vajra-
Sagara garbha, the Tathagata Samantavabhasa shri garbha raja’s Buda realm,
where the Bodhisattva Duryodhana virya vega raja, together with
Bodhisattvas to the number of atoms in countless Buda realms, with the
permission of the Bhagavat, rose up from that ocean of the assembly of
followers [F.282.a] and came to the Saha world realm. They manifested a
network of tassels of every perfume that covered all the oceans of world
realms. They manifested a network of tassels of strings of every kind of jewel
extending throughout all infinite Buda realms. They manifested a network
of tassels and garlands made of every kind of flower that existed throughout
all successive Buda realms. They manifested a network of garlands,
tassels, and strings of beads that connected all Buda realms. They
manifested a network of chains of vajras that holds the ground beneath all
the disks of Buda realms. They manifested the way that all Buda realms
possess networks of various kinds of precious jewels. They manifested all
world realms having acquired and possessing tassels of various kinds of
cloth. They manifested all Buda realms being possessed of networks of
many tassels and garlands of a variety of jewels, and all realms possessing a
network of tassels and garlands made of the light rays of glorious precious
jewels. And they manifested the ground of all world realms having a
network of tassels and garlands of precious jewels and beautiful lion images.91
1. 16 Together with his entourage, he approached the Bhagavat, bowed to the
Bhagavat, and in the southern direction emanated kutagaras made of
precious jewels that illuminated the world, each containing a lion throne and
a lotus made of precious jewels, which shined light into all directions,
[F.282.b] and he and his entourage seated themselves cross-legged upon the
lotuses, their Bodhisattva bodies adorned with a network of flowers made
from every kind of jewel.

1. 17 In the western direction, beyond an ocean of world realms as numerous as
the atoms in countless Buda realms, there was the world realm Mani-
sumeruvirocana dhvaja pradipa, the Tathagata Dharma dhatu jnana pradipa’s
Buda realm, where the Bodhisattva Samanta shri samudgata tejoraja,
together with Bodhisattvas to the number of atoms in countless Buda
realms, with the permission of the Bhagavat, rose up from that ocean of the
assembly of followers, came to the Saha world realm, and manifested the
entire realm of phenomena being filled with clouds of Sumerus of banners,
with various kinds of colors and with various kinds of perfume, that were as
numerous as the atoms in countless Buda realms; the entire realm of
phenomena being filled with clouds of Sumerus of flowers, with various
kinds of colors and with various kinds of scents, as numerous as the atoms
in countless Buda realms; the entire realm of phenomena being filled with
clouds of Sumerus of incenses, with various kinds of colors and with various
kinds of scents, as numerous as the atoms in countless Buda realms; the
entire realm of phenomena being filled with clouds of Sumerus of kings of
jewels, as numerous as the atoms in countless Buda realms, in forms
resembling every kind of requisite, that have arisen from the brilliance of his
pores; the entire realm of phenomena being filled with clouds of Sumerus
of precious jewels, as numerous as the atoms in countless Buda realms, in
the forms of various kinds of banners of stars in a display of circles of lights;
[F.283.a] the entire realm of phenomena being filled with clouds of Sumerus
of kings of jewels, as numerous as the atoms in countless Buda realms, in
the forms of various exceptional displays of the essence of vajras in various
colors; the entire realm of phenomena being filled with clouds of Sumerus of
precious jewels from the Jambu River that brilliantly illuminate all world
realms, as numerous as the atoms in countless Buda realms; the entire
realm of phenomena being filled with clouds of Sumerus of precious jewels,
as numerous as the atoms in countless Buda realms, that filled the sky and
illuminated the entire realm of phenomena; the entire realm of phenomena
being filled with clouds of Sumerus of kings of jewels, as numerous as the
atoms in countless Buda realms, that were in the form of the features of all
Tathagatas; the entire realm of phenomena being filled with clouds of
Sumerus of kings of jewels, as numerous as the atoms in countless Buda
realms, that resounded with the Bodhisattva conduct that revealed the
images of the past practices of all Tathagatas; and the ten directions being
filled with clouds of Sumerus of kings of jewels, as numerous as the atoms in
countless Buda realms, that formed the images of the bodhimandas of all
Tathagatas.92
93
94
95

1. 18 Together with his entourage, he approached the Bhagavat, bowed to the
Bhagavat, and in the western direction emanated kutagaras covered by the
kings of perfumes and by networks of strings of pearls, each having in its
center a lotus made of precious jewels like the banner of Devendra upon a
lion throne, [F.283.b] and he and his entourage seated themselves cross-
legged upon the lotuses, with their Bodhisattva bodies adorned with a
precious network of gold and a crown of kings of wish-fulfilling jewels
bound onto their heads.
1. 19 In the northern direction, beyond an ocean of world realms as numerous
as the atoms in countless Buda realms, there was the world realm Ratna-
vastravabhasa dhvaja, the Tathagata Dharma dhatu gagana shri Vairocana’s
Buda realm, where the Bodhisattva Asanga shri raja, together with
Bodhisattvas to the number of atoms in countless Buda realms, with the
permission of the Bhagavat, rose up from that ocean of the assembly of
followers, came to the Saha world realm, and manifested the sky being
adorned by clouds of precious cloth; manifested the sky being adorned by
clouds of precious clothing of yellow color, yellow in appearance;
manifested the sky being adorned by clouds of precious clothing perfumed
by various scents; manifested the sky being adorned by clouds of clothing
made of the kings of jewels that were like the banner of the sun; manifested
the sky being adorned by clouds of clothing made of the kings of jewels
that shone with the splendor of gold; manifested the sky being adorned by
clouds of clothing made of the kings of jewels that shone with jewels;
manifested the sky being adorned by clouds of precious clothing in the
manifold forms of all the stars; manifested the ten directions of the sky being
filled with clouds of clothing made of precious jewels that were like
cloth of shining crystal; [F.284.a] manifested the ten directions of the
sky being filled with clouds of clothing made of kings of jewels that shone
with glorious brightness; and manifested the sky being covered by clouds of
clothing made of kings of jewels as an ocean of adornments.96
97
98
99
100 101
1. 20 Together with his entourage, he approached the Bhagavat, bowed to the
Bhagavat, and in the northern direction emanated kutagaras of precious
jewels that had emerged from oceans, each having in its center a lotus made
of precious jewels like the banner of Devendra upon a lion throne, and he
and his entourage seated themselves cross-legged upon the lotuses, with
their Bodhisattva bodies adorned with a network of beautiful lion images
made of the kings of precious jewels and with precious star banners above
their heads.
1. 21 In the northeastern direction, beyond an ocean of world realms as
numerous as the atoms in countless Buda realms, there was the world
realm Sarva maha prithivi raja mani rashmi jala pramukta, the Tathagata

Anilambha cakshusha’s Buda realm, where the Bodhisattva Dharma dhatu-
sunirmita pranidhi candra, together with Bodhisattvas to the number of atoms
in countless Buda realms, with the permission of the Bhagavat, rose up
from that ocean of the assembly of followers, came to the Saha world realm,
and manifested all infinite world realms being covered by clouds of
kutagaras of precious materials; [F.284.b] manifested all infinite world realms
being covered by clouds of kutagaras of perfumes; manifested all infinite
world realms being covered by clouds of kutagaras of incense; manifested all
infinite world realms being covered by clouds of kutagaras of sandalwood;
manifested all infinite world realms being covered by clouds of kutagaras of
flowers; manifested all infinite world realms being covered by clouds of
kutagaras of jewels; manifested all infinite world realms being covered by
clouds of kutagaras of vajras; manifested all infinite world realms being
covered by clouds of kutagaras of gold; manifested all infinite world realms
being covered by clouds of kutagaras of clothing; and manifested all infinite
world realms being covered by clouds of kutagaras of lotuses.102
1. 22 Together with his entourage, he approached the Bhagavat, bowed to the
Bhagavat, and in the northeastern direction emanated kutagaras of precious
jewels that had gateways that looked out upon the entire realm of
phenomena, each having in its center, upon a lion throne, a lotus of precious
jewels and unequaled perfume, and he and his entourage seated themselves
cross-legged upon the lotuses, with their Bodhisattva bodies adorned with a
network of flowers made of the kings of precious jewels and turbans that
were like a network of various treasures of kings of jewels bound upon their
heads. [F.285.a]103
1. 23 In the southeastern direction, beyond an ocean of world realms as
numerous as the atoms in countless Buda realms, there was the world
realm Gandha megha vyuha dhvaja, the Tathagata Nageshvararaja’s Buda
realm, where the Bodhisattva Dharmarcishmattejoraja, together with
Bodhisattvas to the number of atoms in countless Buda realms, with the
permission of the Bhagavat, rose up from that ocean of the assembly of
followers, came to the Saha world realm, and covered the entire sky with
clouds of disks of light the color of gold, covered the entire sky with clouds
of disks of light the infinite colors of jewels, covered the entire sky with
clouds of disks of light the color of the urna hair of the Tathagatas, covered
the entire sky with clouds of disks of light the color of various jewels,
covered the entire sky with clouds of disks of light the color of the center of
lotuses, covered the entire sky with clouds of disks of light the color of disks
made of the branches of trees made of the precious kings of jewels, covered
the entire sky with clouds of disks of light the color of the ushnishas of the
Tathagatas, covered the entire sky with clouds of disks of light the color of

Jambu River gold, covered the entire sky with clouds of disks of light the
color of the sun, and covered the entire sky with clouds of disks of light the
color of the moon and the stars. [F.285.b]
1. 24 Together with his entourage, he approached the Bhagavat, bowed to the
Bhagavat, and in the southeastern direction emanated kutagaras of perfect
shining flowers of pristine jewels, each having in its center a lotus of lion-
vajra jewels upon a lion throne, and he and his entourage seated themselves
cross-legged upon the lotuses, their Bodhisattva bodies adorned with a
network of precious kings of brightly shining jewels.
1. 25 In the southwestern direction, beyond an ocean of world realms as
numerous as the atoms in countless Buda realms, there was the world
realm Mani surya pratibhasa garbha, the Tathagata Dharma candra samanta-
jnanavabhasa raja’s Buda realm, where the Bodhisattva Sarva mara-
mandala vikirana jnana dhvaja, together with Bodhisattvas to the number of
atoms in countless Buda realms, with the permission of the Bhagavat, rose
up from that ocean of the assembly of followers, came to the Saha world
realm, and emanated from all his pores clouds of light rays from flowers,
which were as vast as the element of space; emanated from all his pores
clouds of light rays from musical instruments, which were as vast as the
element of space; emanated from all his pores clouds of light rays from
precious jewels, which were as vast as the element of space; emanated from
all his pores clouds of light rays from precious clothing perfumed by
incenses and perfumes of all kinds, which were as vast as the element of
space; emanated from all his pores clouds of light rays from lightning
emanated by Nagas, which were as vast as the element of space; [F.286.a]
emanated from all his pores clouds of light rays from bright, precious jewels,
which were as vast as the element of space; emanated from all his pores
clouds of light rays from shining gold and precious jewels, which were as
vast as the element of space; emanated from all his pores clouds of light rays
from shining kings of jewels that were the essence of splendor, which were
as vast as the element of space; and emanated from all his pores clouds of
light rays from precious jewels that had the nature of illuminating the extent
of the three times, like the ocean of the awareness of the Tathagatas,
spreading throughout the element of space.104
1. 26 Together with his entourage, he approached the Bhagavat, bowed to the
Bhagavat, and in the southwestern direction emanated kutagaras with
networks of great precious jewels that illuminated the entire realm of
phenomena, each having in its center a lotus that radiated light rays of
perfumed lamps upon a lion throne, and he and his entourage seated
themselves cross-legged upon the lotuses, with their Bodhisattva bodies

adorned with networks of the stainless essences of kings of jewels and with
turbans of kings of jewels that emitted words that guided all beings
bound upon their heads.105
1. 27 In the northwestern direction, beyond an ocean of world realms as
numerous as the atoms in countless Buda realms, there was the world
realm Vairocana shri pranidhi garbha, the Tathagata Samanta Vairocana shri-
meru raja’s Buda realm, where the Bodhisattva Vairocana pranidhi jnana-
ketu, together with Bodhisattvas to the number of atoms in countless
Buda realms, [F.286.b] with the permission of the Bhagavat, rose up from
that ocean of the assembly of followers, came to the Saha world realm, and
emanated, from all his signs and features of a great being, all his pores, and
his entire body, clouds of images of the bodies of all the Tathagatas who
appear in the three times; emanated, from all his signs and features of a great
being, all his pores, and his entire body, clouds of images of the bodies of all
the Bodhisattvas who appear in the three times; emanated, from all his signs
and features of a great being, all his pores, and his entire body, clouds of
images of the bodies of all the assemblies of followers of all the Tathagatas
who appear in the three times; emanated, from all his signs and features of a
great being, all his pores, and his entire body, clouds of images of the bodies
of all the hosts of emanations of all the Tathagatas who appear in the three
times; emanated, from all his signs and features of a great being, all his
pores, and his entire body, clouds of images of all the past practices of all the
Tathagatas who appear in the three times; emanated, from all his signs and
features of a great being, all his pores, and his entire body, clouds of images
of the bodies of all Shravakas and pratyeka Budas who appear in the three
times; emanated, from all his signs and features of a great being, all his
pores, and his entire body, [F.287.a] clouds of images of the forms of all the
bodhimandas and Bodhi trees of all the Tathagatas who appear in the three
times; emanated, from all his signs and features of a great being, all his
pores, and his entire body, clouds of the many images of the miracles of all
the Tathagatas who appear in the three times; emanated, from all his signs
and features of a great being, all his pores, and his entire body, clouds of
images of the bodies of all world-lords who appear in the three times; and
emanated, from all his signs and features of a great being, all his pores, and
his entire body, clouds of images of the pure realms of the Budas who
have appeared in the three times.106
1. 28 Instantly these filled the entire element of space, and together with his
entourage, he approached the Bhagavat, bowed to the Bhagavat, and in the
northwestern direction emanated kutagaras with the essence of the kings of
jewels that illuminated every direction, each having in its center, upon a lion
throne, a precious lotus that illuminated the directions, and he and his

entourage seated themselves cross-legged upon the lotuses, with their
Bodhisattva bodies adorned with networks of the invincible light of pearls
and with turbans that had the illuminating light of all jewels bound upon
their heads.
1. 29 In the downward direction, beyond an ocean of world realms as numerous
as the atoms in countless Buda realms, there was the world realm Sarva-
Tathagata prabha mandala vairocana, the Tathagata Asanga jnana ketu dhvaja-
raja’s Buda realm, where the Bodhisattva Sarvavarana vikirana jnana-
vikramin, [F.287.b] together with Bodhisattvas to the number of atoms in
countless Buda realms, with the permission of the Bhagavat, rose up from
that ocean of the assembly of followers, came to the Saha world realm, and
there resounded, from all his pores, an ocean of the languages, sounds,
speech, and word definitions of all beings; there resounded the thunder of
an ocean of clouds of the descriptions of how all the Bodhisattvas in the
three times originated; there resounded an ocean of clouds of the
descriptions of how all the Bodhisattvas in the three times fulfilled their
aspirations; there sounded an ocean of clouds of the descriptions of how all
Bodhisattvas correctly accomplished the perfections; there resounded clouds
of oceans of descriptions of how the field of conduct of all Bodhisattvas
pervaded all realms; there sounded an ocean of clouds of the descriptions of
the accomplishments and miracles of all Bodhisattvas; there resounded an
ocean of descriptions of how all Tathagatas went to the bodhimanda,
dissipated the disturbances of Mara, attained buddhahood at the
bodhimanda, and manifested miracles; there resounded the thunder of an
ocean of clouds of the descriptions of the ways and names of the sutras and
how all Tathagatas turned the wheel of the Dharma; there resounded
descriptions of the ways and methods of the guiding Dharma that guides all
beings through its timely wheel; and there resounded an ocean of
descriptions of the aspirations that were made, the particular roots of merit,
the time, the methods, and the Dharma, in order to gain the realization of all
wisdom.107 108
109
1. 30 He approached the Bhagavat, bowed to the Bhagavat, and in the
downward direction [F.288.a] emanated kutagaras that were treasures of all
the various kinds of shining jewels in the image of the aerial palaces of all
the Tathagatas, each having in its center a lotus of every kind of jewel upon a
lion throne. He and his entourage seated themselves cross-legged upon the
lotuses, with turbans that were banners shining with the images of all
precious bodhimandas bound upon their heads.110
1. 31 In the upward direction, beyond an ocean of world realms as numerous as
the atoms in countless Buda realms, there was the world realm Akshaya-
Buda vamsha nirdesha, the Tathagata Samanta jnana mandala pratibhasa-

nirghosha’s Buda realm, where the Bodhisattva Dharma dhatu pranidhi tala-
nirbheda, together with Bodhisattvas to the number of atoms in countless
Buda realms, with the permission of the Bhagavat, rose up from that ocean
of the assembly of followers, came to the Saha world realm, and from all his
signs and features of a great being, all his pores, his entire body, all his
limbs, his fingers and toes, the words he spoke, and his robe and his skirt he
revealed, within all his signs and features of a great being, [F.288.b] all his
pores, his entire body, all his limbs, his fingers and toes, the words he spoke,
and his robe and his skirt, the images of an ocean of the past practice of
engaging in the perfection of generosity, and all the recipients and the
gifts of all of the assemblies of Bodhisattvas, of himself, of the Bhagavat
Vairocana, of all the Tathagatas throughout the past, of all prophesied and
unprophesied Tathagatas throughout the future who have yet to come, and
of all who in the present reside in infinite Buda realms in the ten
directions. He made visible the images of an ocean of the entire past practice
of engaging in the perfection of correct conduct. He made visible the images
of an ocean of the past practice of engaging in the perfection of patience
through his limbs, his fingers, and his toes being cut off. He made visible the
images of an ocean of the past practice of the diligence, vehemence, and
prowess of all Bodhisattvas. He made visible the images of an ocean of the
past practice of seeking the dhyana of all the Tathagatas. He revealed the
images of an ocean of the past practices of engaging in perfecting the way of
the Dharma wheel of all the Tathagatas, and he revealed the bodies and faces
of those seeking the Dharma with great resolve giving away all possessions.
He revealed the appearances of an ocean of the past practices of rejoicing in
seeing all the Tathagatas, the path of all Bodhisattvas, and bringing
illumination to all beings. He revealed the appearances of an ocean of the
past practices of the fulfillment of an ocean of prayers by all Bodhisattvas
through which there is a display of perfect purification. He revealed the
appearances of an ocean of the past practice of engaging in the
accomplishment, prowess, and purification of the perfection of strength of all
Bodhisattvas. Filling the vast expanse of the realm of phenomena with
clouds of all miraculous manifestation, [F.289.a] he revealed the appearances
of an ocean of the past practice endowed with the domain of the wisdom of
all Bodhisattvas.111
112
113
1. 32 He approached the Bhagavat, bowed to the Bhagavat, and in the upward
direction emanated kutagaras that were adorned by all kinds of lords of
vajras, each having in its center a lotus of sapphires upon a lion throne. He
and his entourage, their blessed bodies adorned by a network of all shining
precious kings of jewels and hung with necklaces of the kings of jewels from

which sounded the names of the Tathagatas of the three times, and their
heads bound by precious turbans, seated themselves cross-legged upon the
lotuses. [B25]
1. 33 All those Bodhisattvas and their entourages had become so through the
completely good conduct and prayer of Bodhisattvas. They had been at the
feet of all Tathagatas and gazed upon their faces. They possessed the
completely pure eyes of wisdom. The ocean of the teaching of the way of the
sutras and the wheel of the Dharma of all the Tathagatas had entered their
ears. They had perfectly perfected the perfections that bring the attainment
of the power of all Bodhisattvas. In each instant they manifested the miracle
of going into the presence of all Tathagatas. They had the range of pervading
all worlds with a single body. They manifested the appearance of their
bodies being present in the assemblies of the pupils of all Tathagatas.
[F.289.b] They had the range of activity of manifesting all worlds being
included within one world that is within a single atom. They ripened all
beings, being present at the exact time for guiding them. They had the range
of activity of emitting from all their pores the thunder of the clouds of the
Dharma wheel of all the Tathagatas. They had attained the knowledge that all
the realms of beings were like magical tricks. They had realized that all the
Tathagatas are like illusions. They were purified by the knowledge that all
rebirths within the continuation of existence were like dreams. They knew
that all accomplishments of wisdom are like mirages. They had realized that
all infinite worlds are like illusory manifestations. They had attained the ten
strengths of the Tathagatas and the light of wisdom. They were supreme
beings of fearlessness and had the forcefulness of the lion’s roar. They had
entered the inexhaustible ocean of unique knowledge. They had obtained
the ocean of the languages of beings and the wisdom of the meaning of the
words of the Dharma. They possessed an unimpeded scope of wisdom that
was as vast as the realm of phenomena and space. They possessed the pure
domain of the wisdom of the clairvoyances of all Bodhisattvas. They
possessed the diligence that disrupts the domain of all the maras. They were
established in the power of knowing the three times. They had attained the
unobscured wisdom of all phenomena. They had the field of activity of space
without any base. They had everlasting omniscience. They had diligence
as vast as space. They had the range of wisdom that did not focus on all
existences as its object. [F.290.a] They had the pervading wisdom  of the
ocean of processes of the entire realm of phenomena. They had entered
through the gateway of the nondifferentiating wisdom of all world realms.
They demonstrated the miracle of all the worlds being connected, one with
the other. They demonstrated bodies that were born in all kinds of world
realms. They had the knowledge of the small and vast, wide and narrow114
115
116

shapes of all world realms. They had realized the wisdom of the small being
the vast. They had the knowledge of the vast being the small. They had
attained being in the presence of all Budas in a single instant of mind.
They possessed bodies that had been blessed by all the Tathagatas. They had
attained the ignorance-free wisdom in all the oceans of the directions. They
pervaded all the oceans of the directions with emanations in an instant of
mind.
1. 34 These Bodhisattvas who all had such limitless qualities through the
blessings of the Tathagatas filled the entirety of Jetavana.
1. 35 The great Shravakas, such as Shariputra, Maudgalyayana, Mahakashyapa,
Revata, Subhuti, Aniruddha, Nandika, Kapphina, Katyayana, and Purna
Maitrayani putra, were present in Jetavana but did not see those miraculous
manifestations of the Tathagata. Neither did they see the miraculous
displays of the Buda, the majesty of the Buda, the manifestations of
the Buda, the miracles of the Buda, the supremacy of the Buda, the
miraculous conduct of the Buda, the power of the Buda, the blessing
of the Buda, or the pure realm of the Buda.117
118
119
1. 36 Nor did they see the inconceivable range of activity of the Bodhisattvas,
[F.290.b] the coming of the Bodhisattvas, the arrival of the Bodhisattvas, the
gathering of the Bodhisattvas, the approach of the displays of paranormal
powers of the Bodhisattvas, the circle of the assembly of Bodhisattvas, the
Bodhisattvas arranging themselves in the directions, the display of the lion
thrones of the Bodhisattvas, the dwellings of the Bodhisattvas, the activities
of the Bodhisattvas, the display of the power of the samadhis of the
Bodhisattvas, the gaze of the Bodhisattvas, the awesomeness of the
Bodhisattvas, the forcefulness of the Bodhisattvas, the offerings made to the
Tathagata by the Bodhisattvas, the prophecies given to the Bodhisattvas, the
ripening of the Bodhisattvas, the renunciation of the Bodhisattvas, the
purified Dharma bodies of the Bodhisattvas, the fulfilled wisdom bodies of
the Bodhisattvas, the proclaimed aspiration bodies of the Bodhisattvas, the
created form bodies of the Bodhisattvas, the pure, perfect features of the
Bodhisattvas, the display of the auras of infinite colors of the Bodhisattvas,
the network of light rays emanated by the Bodhisattvas, the spreading
clouds emanated by the Bodhisattvas, or the network of the directions being
pervaded by the Bodhisattvas, nor did they see the miraculous realm of the
conduct of the Bodhisattvas.120
121
1. 37 Why was that? Because they did not have the same roots of merit. They
had not accumulated in the past the roots of merit that are the cause for
seeing the miracles of a Buda; [F.291.a] they had not in the past taught the
qualities and pure display of the Buda realms included within the world
realms in the ten directions; they had not described the Buda miracles of

the Buda bhagavats; and they had not in the past encouraged beings
continuing in samsara to attain the highest, complete enlightenment. They
had not established in the minds of others the aspiration to enlightenment;
they had not engaged in preventing the discontinuation of the family
lineage of the Tathagatas; they did not have the diligence to gather all beings
as pupils; they did not encourage Bodhisattvas to practice the perfections;
and when they were continuing in samsara, they did not have as their goal
the level of wisdom that transcends that of all beings.
1. 38 They had not accumulated the roots of merit to become omniscient. They
had not accomplished the roots of merit of a Tathagata who transcends the
world. They had not realized the clairvoyance that perceives the miracles in
all the pure realms of the Budas. They did not know the roots of merit from
focusing upon the exceptional enlightenment that transcends the world,
which is perceived by the vision of the Bodhisattvas and originates from the
great aspirations of the Bodhisattvas.
1. 39 Nor did all the Shravakas and pratyeka Budas know the exceptional
perception of the vision of the wisdom eyes of the completely good
Bodhisattvas. Nor did they know the attainments of the Bodhisattvas
through the illusory nature of phenomena, which arise from the blessing of
the Tathagatas; or the blessing of possessing the various dream-like
perceptions of Bodhisattvas; [F.291.b] or the increasing great power of the joy
of Bodhisattvas.122
123 124
1. 40 Therefore, the great Shravakas, such as the supreme pair, the excellent
pair, and so on, did not see the miracles of the Tathagata; they did not hear
of them, did not know them, did not comprehend them, did not understand
them, were not aware of them, did not believe in them, did not think of them,
did not regard them, did not consider them, did not dwell upon them, and
did not reflect upon them.125
1. 41 Why was that? Because the scope of a Buda’s wisdom  is not the same
as that of the Shravaka. Therefore, even though the great Shravakas were
present in Jetavana, they did not see the Buda’s miracles. They did not
have the roots of merit that would accord with that. They did not have the
pure vision for seeing the Buda’s miracles. They did not have the samadhi
that realizes the power for causing something vast to be within a small object
of perception. They did not have the liberation, the miraculous powers, the
supremacy, the power, the mastery, the state, the perception, the vision, or
the wisdom [F.292.a] through which they could know, see, comprehend,
understand, fathom, realize, view, experience, grasp, surmount, hear from
others, teach, describe, reveal, praise, bestow, inspire beings toward, connect
beings with, bring beings to, or establish beings in the nature of the
Buda’s miracles.126

1. 42 Why was that? Because they had become what they were through the
Shravakayana, had accomplished the path of the Shravakas, had fulfilled the
range of the conduct of the Shravakas, had gained the result of the Shravakas,
had gained the knowledge of the illumination of the truths, were established
in the summit of existence, had attained absolute peace, had minds that were
devoid of great compassion, had no regard for all the world realms, and had
accomplished their own benefit.
1. 43 They had gathered and were present in Jetavana before, to the left, to the
right, and to the rear of the Bhagavat, but they did not see those miracles of
the Buda.
1. 44 Why was that? They had not attained omniscient wisdom; they had not
accomplished omniscient wisdom; they were not established in omniscient
wisdom; they had not prayed for omniscient wisdom; they had not realized
omniscient wisdom; they had not become imbued with omniscient wisdom;
and they had not become purified in omniscient wisdom and therefore were
not able to observe, to know, to see, or to realize the miracles from the
Buda’s samadhi.
1. 45 Why was that? Because they could be seen through the vision of those
who were in the family of Bodhisattvas and not through the vision of
Shravakas. Therefore, those great Shravakas were present in Jetavana but did
not see the Tathagata’s miracles, the Tathagata’s power, the Tathagata’s
pure realm, or the gathering of the Bodhisattvas. [F.292.b]
1. 46 By analogy, many hundreds of thousands of pretas, suffering from thirst
and hunger, naked, without clothing, their skin the color of being burned,
shriveled by the wind and sun, attacked by flocks of crows, and terrified by
wolves and jackals, do not see the great Ganges River even though they
are gathered on its opposite banks, because they are obscured by obscuring
karma. Some of them see a dry riverbed without water, and some of them see
it filled with ashes. In that same way, although the sthaviras, the great
Shravakas, were present in Jetavana, their vision was obscured by the
cataracts of the ignorance that is contrary to omniscience. And this is
because they did not possess the power of the root of merit of the level of
omniscience.127
1. 47 By analogy, a man who is in the middle of a great gathering of many
people becomes drowsy. He falls asleep, and in a dream he sees in that place
the divine city that is Shakra’s beautiful residence, which is upon the summit
of Sumeru and has trees; is encircled by a wall of fruit trees; is filled with a
quintillion female devas and filled with a quintillion male devas; has wish-
fulfilling trees that emit divine clothing, strings of pearls, precious
ornaments, and various kinds of necklaces; has many trees of musical
instruments that emit beautiful music when the divine instruments of128

various kinds are moved by the breezes; and has an array of all kinds of
joyful amusements. He hears the melodious, beautiful sounds made by the
female devas who are singing and playing the divine musical instruments,
and he thinks that he is there. [F.293.a] Even though he sees that everywhere
this place is adorned by an array of divine things, the many people who are
gathered in that same place do not see it, do not know it, and do not perceive
it. Why is that? Because it is perceived in a dream by the man who is asleep.
Although those many people are in the same place, they do not see it.
1. 48 In the same way, those Bodhisattvas, those lords of the world who aspire
to enlightenment, who had received the vast blessing of the Buda, who
had obtained the unmistaken power of their roots of merit, who had made
prayers of aspiration for omniscience, who understood well all the qualities
of the Tathagatas, who were well established in the vast array of the
Bodhisattva path, and who were highly accomplished in the Dharma of the
aspects of omniscient wisdom  -they had completely excellent
Bodhisattva conduct, had the pure fulfillment of their prayers of aspiration,
had reached the domain of wisdom of all the Bodhisattva levels, enjoyed all
practices through Bodhisattva samadhi, and practiced without impediment
the entire range of Bodhisattva wisdom, so that they could see, perceive, and
experience the inconceivable supremacy of the Buda and the displays of
the Buda. However, the great Shravakas, the supreme pair, the good pair,
and so on did not see them or know of them, because they did not have the
vision of the Bodhisattvas.129
1. 49 By analogy, the Himalaya, the king of mountains, [F.293.b] is filled with
places that are the sources of herbs. Those individuals who have acquired
the knowledge of mantras, medicine, and herbs and are accomplished in that
science, and who are learned in the usage of all herbs, carry out there the
task of collecting those herbs. Others who dwell on that king of mountains
and who are herders of animals, cattle, goats, and sheep; those who are
hunters; and other people who do not know the science of herbs do not
know the taste, power, effects, locations, usages, and application of herbs. In
the same way, the Bodhisattvas who perceive the range of activity of the
Tathagata, who have perfected the range of Bodhisattva miracles, can
see the range of miracles of the Tathagata’s samadhi. The great Shravakas,
the supreme pair, the good pair, and others who were content concerning
what had to be done for themselves, who were indifferent concerning what
had to be done for others, who were uncaring -although they were present
in Jetavana, they did not perceive the range of miracles of the Tathagata’s
samadhi.130
131
132
133

1. 50 For example, this great earth is the perfect source of all jewels. It is filled
with many hundreds of thousands of treasures. It is completely filled with
different kinds of various jewels. A man who is skilled in the knowledge of
the sources of jewels and treasure, is educated in the science of examining
jewels, has knowledge of the science of treasures, is well trained in the craft
of jewelry, and is supported by the power of vast merit will obtain
whatever jewels he desires, and he will completely satisfy himself, support
his father and mother, care for his sons and daughters, and also distribute
his wealth among other beings who are old, sick, poor, suffering misfortune,
or in need of food and clothes, [F.294.a] bringing others various kinds of
happiness from wealth. However, those beings who have no knowledge of
treasures or the source of jewels and who have not created merit do not have
the pure vision of the knowledge of jewels. Even though they are at the very
location, they do not perceive that there is precious treasure and a source of
jewels, and without that knowledge they do not obtain jewels, nor do they
make use of the jewels.134
135
1. 51 In the same way, the Bodhisattvas had the pure vision of wisdom
concerning the inconceivable range of the Tathagata, and they perceived the
inconceivable range of the wisdom of the Tathagata. They were present in
Jetavana and saw the miracles of the Buda, perceived an ocean of the
ways of the Dharma, had applied the seal of samadhi, were engaged in
making offerings to the Tathagata, were dedicated to possessing the
Dharma, and gathered beings through the four methods of gathering pupils.
The great Shravakas did not see those miracles of the Tathagata or that
gathering of the great assembly of Bodhisattvas.
1. 52 By analogy, a man who is blindfolded arrives at an island of jewels. He
walks around that island of jewels, stands on it, sits on it, and lies down on
it, but he does not see that source of jewels. He does not see the trees of
jewels, the clothing of jewels, the incense of jewels, or all the jewels. He does
not know the scope, the value, or the use of those jewels. He does not
acquire the jewels. He does not understand what could be done with the
jewels. Those who are not blindfolded see and know all those jewels.
[F.294.b]
1. 53 In the same way, the Bodhisattvas had reached the island of the jewels of
the Dharma and saw before them the supreme jewel of the Tathagata, the
adornment of the entire world, present in Jetavana and demonstrating the
inconceivable miracles of a Buda. The great Shravakas were present,
staying at the feet of the Tathagata, but did not see manifested miracles from
the range of the Tathagata’s samadhi. They did not see the great assembly of
the Bodhisattvas who were like a source of jewels. Why was that? Because
their eyes of wisdom were blindfolded by the ignorance that is contrary to

omniscience. They did not have the purified eyes of wisdom of the
Bodhisattvas, and they had not realized the comprehension of the lineage of
the Dharma’s domain, through which one could see the inconceivable
manifestation of miracles from the supremacy of the Tathagata’s samadhi.136
1. 54 By analogy, there is the completely purified sight called stainless brilliance,
which does not experience any darkness. If a man who has obtained that
purified sight named stainless brilliance were to go in the completely black
darkness of a dark night among a gathering of a quintillion people who have
various practices and conduct and whose sight is overwhelmed by
darkness, he would move, stand, sit down, and act among them in various
ways, but those people will not see or know of that man’s various kinds of
activity. [F.295.a] However, when that man looks in the different directions at
the various practices and conduct that the great gathering of beings is
performing, he sees their various shapes, their various colors, with none of
those various sights unseen. In the same way, the Tathagata, who has an
entourage of an assembly of Bodhisattvas, possesses the sight that is pure
and unimpeded so that he sees and knows the entire world. He
demonstrates the manifestation of the great miracles of a Buda’s samadhi,
but the great Shravakas do not see those great miracles manifested by the
samadhi and wisdom of the Tathagata. Nor do they see that great assembly
of the great Bodhisattvas.137
138
1. 55 By analogy, it is like when a Bikshu in the center of an assembly of many
beings rests in the samadhi of the pervasion of earth or rests in the samadhi
pervaded by water or the samadhi pervaded by fire, pervaded by air,
pervaded by blue, pervaded by yellow, pervaded by red, pervaded by white,
pervaded by devas, pervaded by the bodies of various beings, pervaded
by all sounds and voices, or pervaded by all perceptions. That assembly of
many beings does not see a mass of water, does not see the light of fire, does
not see the pervasion by the bodies of various beings, and so on up to not
seeing the pervasion by all perceptions. It only sees him practicing and
resting in the samadhis. In the same way, when the Tathagata manifests
inconceivable miracles that are the range of a Buda’s samadhi, the great
Shravakas do not see or know them. [F.295.b] The Bodhisattvas who are
following the path of the Tathagatas see and comprehend that range of
activity of the Tathagatas.139
1. 56 For example, as soon as a man who creates ointments smears it on his two
eyes, an entire multitude of beings cannot see his body, but he can see the
bodies of the entire multitude of beings. Whether he is walking, sitting, or
standing, he sees the entire multitude of beings. In that same way, the
Tathagata has transcended the world, has passed beyond the range of

perception of all beings, and has attained the range of omniscient wisdom
but can be perceived by the vision of the wisdom of the Bodhisattvas. He can
see all beings, but the great Shravakas do not see the miracle of the Tathagata.
1. 57 For example, a deity who accompanies a human for his entire life is always
following him. The deity sees the human, but the human does not see the
deity. In the same way, the Tathagata has attained the range of perception of
the wisdom of omniscience, and he manifests miracles in the middle of the
great gathering of the assembly of Bodhisattvas, but the great Shravakas do
not see and do not know of the Tathagata’s great manifestation of miracles
or the miracle of the assembled circle of Bodhisattvas.
1. 58 Consider, for example, a Bikshu who has reached the perfection of power
over his entire mind and rests in a meditation in which all perception and
sensation has ceased. Through his being without perception or sensation,
his six senses do not experience anything. He has not attained nirvana, and
worldly events are continuing and present, but through the power and
might of being in that meditation, he does not perceive them and does not
see them. In the same way, [F.296.a] the great Shravakas were present in
Jetavana, and they had all the six sensory faculties, but they did not see, did
not perceive, and did not know of the manifestation of miracles and
supremacy from the samadhi of the Tathagata. Why is that? The range of
activity of the Buda is profound, vast, immeasurable, difficult to see, and
difficult to understand. The Buda’s range of activity is inconceivable and
is inaccessible to the Shravakas and pratyeka Budas. Therefore, the great
Shravakas were assembled in Jetavana and were present at the feet of the
Bhagavat, but they did not see the Buda’s miracles or the great gathering
of Bodhisattvas. They also did not see or perceive the accumulation in
Jetavana of the qualities and adornments of countless, innumerable pure
world realms, because they were not worthy of it.140
141
1. 59 At that time, the Bodhisattva Vairocana pranidhana nabhi rashmi prabha
recited these verses:
1. 60 “See the inconceivable enlightenment,
The buddhahood of the supreme being!
The Jina has manifested the miracles
Of a Buda in this Jetadhvaja. {1}
1. 61 “There appears the self-arising,
Incalculable power of transformation
That the world, not knowing the way
Of the Dharma, is ignorant of. {2}
1. 62 “There are the profound,
Immeasurable, inconceivable

Miracles of the Dharma kings
That the world does not fathom. {3} [F.296.b]
1. 63 “The Budas have infinite splendor142
And are adorned by characteristics.
The Dharmas that the Budas produce
Are without characteristics. {4}
1. 64 “In the grove that is named Jeta
The Jina demonstrates miracles
That are without center or edge
And difficult to describe in words. {5}
1. 65 “See the assembly of great beings,
Of Bodhisattvas, who have assembled
From countless millions of realms
Wishing to look upon the Jina. {6}143
1. 66 “The entire world is unable
To know or think of that
Fulfillment of prayers
And that unimpeded conduct. {7}
1. 67 “The pratyeka Budas
And the Shravakas do not know
Anything about their conduct
Or the range of their minds. {8}144
1. 68 “Those with great wisdom, the Bodhisattvas,
Are invincible and undefeatable,145
Banners of heroism, unadulterated,
And they have reached the level of wisdom. {9}
1. 69 “They have great renown
And have attained immeasurable samadhis.
They demonstrate miracles that pervade
The entire domain of phenomena.” {10}
1. 70 Then the Bodhisattva Duryodhana virya vega raja, through the blessing of the
Buda, looked into the ten directions and recited these verses:
1. 71 “See those who are born from the sugatas,
They who bring happiness to the world,
Who have the essence of merit, great wisdom,
And who have realized the conduct of a Bodhisattva. {11}

1. 72 “They are learned, with infinite knowledge.
Their minds are in a perfect state of meditation.
They have the range of a vast wisdom
That is profound and without center or limit. {12}
1. 73 “See the numerous oceans
Of they who have no dwelling, no basis,
Who are assembled from the ten directions
And seated upon lotus seats {13}146
1. 74 “In the great forest named Jeta
That is beautified by many adornments,
That is completely filled with Bodhisattvas
And is the hermitage of the Sugata. {14} [F.297.a]
1. 75 “They are without basis, without acquisition,
Without elaboration, without foundation,
With unimpeded minds, stainless,
Focused on the essence of phenomena. {15}
1. 76 “They are banners of wisdom,
Great heroes who have vajra minds.
They are unshakable and teach nirvana
Within unceasing qualities. {16}147
1. 77 “They have gathered from numerous millions
Of realms beyond number in the ten directions
And have arrived before the Buda
And are free from dualistic perception. {17}
1. 78 “They see these miracles
Of the self-arisen Lion of the Shakyas,
And it is through his blessing
That these Bodhisattvas have gathered. {18}
1. 79 “The offspring of the jinas, they who have attained perfection,
Do not distinguish between the Buda’s Dharmas
On the level of the essence of phenomena
But make distinctions merely in terms of terminology. {19}
1. 80 “They are established in the ultimate conclusion
Of the indivisibility of the essence of phenomena,
But they make distinctions between phenomena
Through producing unceasing words.” {20}

1. 81 Then the Bodhisattva Samanta shri samudgata tejoraja, through the blessing of
the Buda, looked into the ten directions and recited these verses:
1. 82 “See the vast circle of wisdom
Of the one who is supreme among beings.
He knows when it is timely and untimely
And then teaches the Dharma to beings. {21}
1. 83 “He completely defeats all opposition
From gathered assemblies of tirthikas.
He demonstrates miraculous acts
According to the wishes of beings. {22}
1. 84 “The Sugata does not dwell in a direction;148
The Buda does not go to a realm.149
The great Muni is always both150
Ascertainable and unascertainable. {23} [F.297.b]
1. 85 “The sun moving through the sky
Demarcates the number of days.
Thus the Teacher, wise with knowledge,
Demarcates the three times without impediment. {24}
1. 86 “On the night of a full moon
The moon’s disk is the brightest light.
In that way, the Lord151
Full of white Dharma is seen. {25}
1. 87 “Just as the disk of the sun
Moves through the sky
Without being stopped -
Thus are the Buda’s miracles. {26}
1. 88 “Just as space is not dependent
On the worlds in the directions,
In that way, the Buda miracles
Of the Lamp of the World are to be known. {27}
1. 89 “Just as in the world the earth
Is the support for all beings,
In that way, in the world the Dharma wheel
Of the Lamp of the World is a support. {28}
1. 90 “Just as the wind, without impediment,
Moves swiftly through the sky,

In that way, the Buda’s nature
Moves through the world realms. {29}
1. 91 “Just as the numbers of worlds
Are based on accumulations of water,
In that way, the Budas of the three times
Are based on accumulations of wisdom.” {30}
1. 92 Then the Bodhisattva Asanga shri garbha raja, through the blessing of the
Buda, looked into the ten directions and recited these verses:
1. 93 “Just like high mountains and cliffs
That are made of vajras,
The Buda, the protector of all worlds,
Is the highest in the world. {31}
1. 94 “Just as the great water of the ocean
Is immeasurable and unpolluted,
In that way, the sight of the Buda
Dispels the thirst of the world. {32}
1. 95 “Just as Mount Meru
Is higher than the ocean’s water,
In that way, the Lamp of the World
Is higher than the ocean of phenomena. {33}
1. 96 “Just as the vast ocean
Is the source of all jewels, [F.298.a]
The Self-Arisen One’s wisdom
Is unending instantaneous knowledge. {34}
1. 97 “The Guide’s wisdom is profound,
Incalculable, and immeasurable;
Therefore, the Buda demonstrates
Immeasurable, inconceivable miracles. {35}
1. 98 “Just as a skilled magician
Manifests the qualities of illusions,
In that way, the Buda, who has the power
Of knowledge, manifests miracles. {36}
1. 99 “Just as a pure wish-fulfilling jewel
Fulfills the wishes that are made,
In that way, the Jina fulfills
The pure aspirations of beings. {37}

1. 100 “Just as a shining jewel
Shines with lights,
In that way, pure omniscience
Illuminates the aspirations of beings. {38}
1. 101 “Just as a jewel with eight facets
Remains facing all directions,
In that way, the unimpeded Lamp
Illuminates the realm of phenomena. {39}
1. 102 “Just as the bright water-purifying jewel
Makes turbid water clear,
In that way, the sight of the Buda
Purifies the senses of the world.” {40}
1. 103 Then the Bodhisattva Dharma dhatu pranidhi sunirmita candra raja, through
the blessing of the Buda, looked into the ten directions and recited these
verses:
1. 104 “Just as looking through a sapphire transforms152
A direction in this world into the color of the sapphire,
In the same way, seeing the Buda
Transforms beings into the color of enlightenment. {41}153
1. 105 “The Buda manifests immeasurable
Miracles of various kinds,
Within each single atom,
That purify the Bodhisattvas. {42}
1. 106 “They are marvelous, profound,
Infinite, difficult to accomplish,
In the scope of the wisdom of the wise,
And inaccessible to the world. {43}
1. 107 “For the consummation of the Bodhisattvas
There is the perfected display, [F.298.b]
The purification of the Buda’s activity
That teaches entering the realm of the Dharma. {44}154
1. 108 “The Jina manifests
In countless Buda realms
That are completely filled
By Budas encircled by the wise. {45}
1. 109 “The Teacher with dominion over all Dharma teachings,

The supreme one of the Shakyas, has appeared.
These miracles of his, which are
Beyond measure, have occurred. {46}
1. 110 “You see this immeasurable variety155
Of the activities of the constant one.
He who has immeasurable splendor
Manifests infinite miracles. {47}
1. 111 “The Lord of the World teaches
The Jina’s children in the essence of the Dharma,
And they become those who have
The unimpeded range of wisdom in all Dharmas. {48}
1. 112 “The lord of humans through his powers156
Turns the wheel of the Dharma,
Manifesting hundreds of miracles
And purifying the entire world. {49}157
1. 113 “In the domain of the supreme among beings
There is the purified circle of knowledge,
The great Nagas with enormous wisdom,
Who bring liberation from the entire world.” {50}158
1. 114 Then the Bodhisattva Dharmarcishmattejoraja, through the blessing of the
Buda, looked into the ten directions and recited these verses:
1. 115 “The Shravakas of the supreme Rishi
Who appear in the three times159
Are without the knowledge
Of the footsteps the Sugata takes. {51}160
1. 116 “The entirety of the pratyeka Budas
Free of error, who appear in the three times,
Are also without the knowledge
Of the footsteps the Protector takes. {52}
1. 117 “It goes without saying that all beings,
Obscured by the darkness of ignorance
And like dogs tied to a leash,
Have no knowledge of the Guide. {53}
1. 118 “The Jina cannot be known.
He cannot be measured by any measure.
The Buda has unimpeded knowledge.

He has transcended the path of words. {54} [F.299.a]
1. 119 “The constant one has the light of the full moon,
And he is beautified by his features.161
For countless kalpas he performs
Unimpeded miraculous actions. {55}162
1. 120 “Though one contemplates with a focused mind
The Buda in this and that way
For countless millions of kalpas,
He will remain indescribable. {56}
1. 121 “One will not completely understand
A single aspect of the self-arisen qualities.
Even when the Buda is gazed upon,
The Buda’s Dharmas are inconceivable. {57}
1. 122 “All such fields of activity as those,
Which are difficult to see, will appear
To those who have the aspiration,
To those whose minds delight in them. {58}
1. 123 “Those who maintain an unstained, wise mind
And have an overpowering, great accumulation163
Enter into this way
Of infinite merit and wisdom. {59}
1. 124 “Those with vast aspirations,
Vast motivation, and vows
Will reach the field of activity of the jinas
And attain vast enlightenment.” {60}
1. 125 Then the Bodhisattva Sarva mara mandala vikirana jnana dhvaja raja, through
the blessing of the Buda, looked into the ten directions and recited these
verses:
1. 126 “They have bodies of unimpeded wisdom,
And therefore the self-arisen ones have no body.
The scope of their wisdom is inconceivable,
And therefore one cannot conceive of them. {61}
1. 127 “A Buda’s body is obtained
Through inconceivable acts of goodness,
And therefore it is unstained by the three worlds
And beautified by a supreme being’s features and signs. {62}

1. 128 “He completely illuminates the world
And is purified of the realm of phenomena.
He is the gateway to the enlightenment of buddhahood
And is the great source of all wisdom. {63}
1. 129 “Unsullied and pristine,
Free of all clinging,
A sun for the world
Radiating rays of wisdom, {64}
1. 130 “Eliminating the terrors of existence
Through purification of the three realms, [F.299.b]
And bringing Bodhisattvas to perfection,
He is the source of the enlightenment of buddhahood. {65}164
1. 131 “Although he manifests infinite colors,
He is devoid of all colors.
He manifests the countless, endless165
Colors because of all beings. {66}
1. 132 “There is no one who can fully
Understand the Buda’s wisdom,166
Which in each instant purifies
The enlightenment of buddhahood. {67}
1. 133 “The unceasing teaching of wisdom
Is by its nature unchanging.
In a single instant it describes
All the jinas of the three times. {68}
1. 134 “The wise one who is dedicated to enlightenment,
Constantly forsaking all other activity,
Although his mind is called mind,
In his mind no mind arises. {69}167
1. 135 “The qualities of buddhahood
That the Budas manifest
Are inconceivable, are a field beyond description,
Are profound, and are beyond the scope of words.” {70}
1. 136 Then the Bodhisattva Vairocana pranidhana ketu dhvaja, through the blessing
of the Buda, looked into the ten directions and recited these verses:
1. 137 “Those who are pure and with unconfused recollection,
Who possess the Dharma with complete certainty,

Who have inconceivable understanding,
Are an unending ocean of enlightenment. {71}
1. 138 “Their minds have certainty concerning this.
This is their realm of practice.
Their wisdom is unshakable.
They have eliminated doubt. {72}
1. 139 “They do not become disheartened.
They do not become despondent.
They maintain the aspiration
Of devotion to the Buda’s Dharma. {73}
1. 140 “They have the deepest faith,
And they develop what is truly superior.
They delight in the wisdom
That has no object and no fixation. {74}
1. 141 “They are filled with virtuous qualities
Created during millions of kalpas.
All of that is completely given away
By these unequaled seekers of wisdom. {75} [F.300.a]
1. 142 “Although they are active within samsara,
They are not based within samsara.
They have realized the Buda’s Dharma
And so delight in the Buda’s field of activity. {76}
1. 143 “Whatever worldly good fortune there is
That occurs within the realms of beings,
The resolute ones renounce it all,
And they remain in the Buda’s good fortune. {77}
1. 144 “The world remains fruitless,
Continuously in bondage.168
Those whose conduct is free from attachment
Are continuously fixed on benefiting beings. {78}
1. 145 “Their unequaled conduct
Is inconceivable for all beings.
They who think of the world’s happiness
Bring an end to suffering. {79}
1. 146 “They have compassion for the whole world
And have the pure wisdom of enlightenment.

They are a light for the world
And bring liberation to the entire world.” {80}
1. 147 Then the Bodhisattva Sarvavarana vikirana jnana vikranta raja, through the
blessing of the Buda, looked into the ten directions and recited these
verses:169
1. 148 “Even the word Buda is a great rarity
For thousands of millions of kalpas,170
Let alone seeing a supreme one
Who eliminates all doubts. {81}
1. 149 “He has gained the realization of all Dharmas.
He is the object of veneration for the three worlds.171
He brings purification to all beings.
He is a light for the world that brings joy when seen. {82}172
1. 150 “One will never have enough
Of seeing the form body
Of the supreme blameless being,
Even in a quintillion kalpas. {83}
1. 151 “The Bodhisattvas are continually gazing173
At the form body of the lord of humans.
They have no attachment, and they dedicate
Their own virtues to enlightenment for the benefit of others. {84}
1. 152 “The form body of the great Muni
Is this gateway to the enlightenment of buddhahood,
From which comes unimpeded and
Unceasing discriminating knowledge. {85}174
1. 153 “The supreme great Muni illuminates [F.300.b]
Countless, innumerable beings,
Brings them into the Mahayana,
And prophesies their supreme enlightenment. {86}
1. 154 “He illuminates an infinite world,
A realm that has the nature of great merit,
A domain of wisdom that has arisen and appeared,175
And he multiplies accumulated merit. {87}
1. 155 “He cuts through the net of suffering
And purifies the aggregation of wisdom.176
Those who please the Jina

Have no fear of the lower realms. {88}
1. 156 “On seeing the supreme two-legged being,
An extremely vast motivation develops.
The incalculable power of wisdom
Creates an illuminating radiance. {89}177
1. 157 “Those who see the Buda, the supreme human,
Will certainly attain supreme enlightenment.
They will have certainty, thinking,
‘I shall become a Tathagata.’ ” {90}
1. 158 Then the Bodhisattva Dharma dhatu pranidhi tala nirbheda, through the
blessing of the Buda, looked into the ten directions and recited these
verses:178
1. 159 “Having seen the Muni who is the foremost Shakya,
Who possesses a perfection of infinite qualities,
Those with minds that make dedications
Are purified within the Mahayana. {91}
1. 160 “The constant ones who have great compassion,
Who turn the wheel of the Dharma,
The Tathagatas
Appear for the sake of all beings. {92}
1. 161 “How could all beings
Be able to repay the Budas,
Who for trillions of kalpas
Have been dedicated to benefiting beings? {93}
1. 162 “It is better to be cooked for ten million kalpas
In the three unendurable lower existences
Than to not see the Teacher,
Who dispels all attachment. {94}
1. 163 “However great the aggregation of suffering
That exists within the minds of all beings,
One can endure the experience of all of it,
But not being deprived of seeing the Buda. {95}
1. 164 “It is better to remain for a long time
In all these different states of being
That are in the lower existences in this world [F.301.a]
Than to be deprived of hearing the Buda. {96}179

1. 165 “It is better to remain for countless kalpas
In each of the hell realms
Than to remain far from the supreme enlightenment
That has been attained by infinite jinas. {97}
1. 166 “For what reason would one wish to remain
For a long time in the lower realms?
One would do so as a cause of seeing
The lord of jinas, which increases wisdom. {98}
1. 167 “All suffering is eliminated
Through seeing the Jina, the Lord of the World,
And there is the realization of the wisdom
Of the field of activity of the perfect Budas. {99}
1. 168 “By seeing the Buda, the supreme human,
All obscurations are brought to an end.
It causes the increase of immeasurable merit
Through which enlightenment is attained. {100}
1. 169 “Seeing the Buda eliminates
The doubts and uncertainties of beings,
And both worldly and unworldly
Wishes are completely fulfilled.” {101}
